# What?
Discuss overcoming the frustration of learning a whole new world of programming
Briefly mention Disney Talk

Find a good place to talk about repeated learning frustration and how i employed singing and dance breaks to get out of a rut. Add in “I actually did a talk last year entitled “When Your Disney Playlist Saves Your Tech Career” and its about one of the ways I dealt with the frustration of learning something new when I was first getting into programming.”

# Where?

Early in Developer Experience > Clojure section.
"When I first started with Clojure, I was also just getting into programming, from scratch."

# Why?

Requsted by committeee to add original content that focuses on my learning journey

# How?

So, it was within the context of Clojure that I was uncovering this _whole_ _new_ _world_ of programming.

(aladdin photo with clojure logo and name)

But I was surprised by how often I became frustrated with ideas I didn't understand. It soon became clear I needed a constructive way to overcome this frustration, or I was in danger of giving up software development all together. I decided to do what every first time programmer does:

[ make slide of disney characters dancing and singing ]

I started singing and dancing to Disney music on my 5 minute breaks.

.. And it helped! Between the inspiring lyrics, the physical activity, the escapism of being a character for a little while - I came back to my work with a clearer mind and a better attitude toward problem solving.

If you'd like to hear more about it, check out my talk I gave last year - “When Your Disney Playlist Saves Your Tech Career”. (Yes, that is my organic typo, not an artifact generated by AI.) or (I’ll give you a sticker if you spot my typo there).